VideoMamba: State Space Model for Eﬃcient
                  Video Understanding

           Kunchang Li1,2,3 , Xinhao Li4,3 , Yi Wang3~ , Yinan He3
              Yali Wang1,3~ , Limin Wang4,3~ , and Yu Qiao3,1~
      1
        Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
                    2
                       University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
                       3
                         OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory
      4
        State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
            Code & Models: https://github.com/OpenGVLab/VideoMamba



          Abstract. Addressing the dual challenges of local redundancy and global
          dependencies in video understanding, this work innovatively adapts the
          Mamba to the video domain. The proposed VideoMamba overcomes the
          limitations of existing 3D convolution neural networks (CNNs) and video
          transformers. Its linear-complexity operator enables eﬃcient long-term
          modeling, which is crucial for high-resolution long video understanding.
          Extensive evaluations reveal VideoMamba’s four core abilities: (1) Scala-
          bility in the visual domain without extensive dataset pretraining, thanks
          to a novel self-distillation technique; (2) Sensitivity for recognizing short-
          term actions even with fine-grained motion diﬀerences; (3) Superiority
          in long-term video understanding, showcasing significant advancements
          over traditional feature-based models; and (4) Compatibility with other
          modalities, demonstrating robustness in multi-modal contexts. Through
          these advantages, VideoMamba sets a new benchmark, oﬀering a scalable
          and eﬃcient solution for comprehensive video understanding.

          Keywords: Mamba · Video Understanding · Multimodal Learning


1     Introduction

The core objective for video understanding lies in mastering spatiotemporal
representations, which presents two formidable challenges: large spatiotempo-
ral redundancy in short video clips and complex spatiotemporal dependencies in
long contexts. Although the once-dominant 3D CNNs [9,20,77] and video trans-
formers [2, 4] eﬀectively tackle one of these challenges by leveraging either local
convolution or long-range attention, they fall short in addressing both simulta-
neously. UniFormer [44] attempts to integrate the advantages of both methods,
but it struggles with modeling long videos, which has been the major trend in
recent research on video understanding [48, 73] and generation [5, 92].

     Interns at Shanghai AI Laboratory.        ~ Corresponding authors.
