                                          Mamba: Linear-Time Sequence Modeling with Selective State Spaces
                                                                                                          1                  2
                                                                                              Albert Gu∗ and Tri Dao∗
                                                                        1
                                                                            Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
                                                                             2
                                                                                 Department of Computer Science, Princeton University
arXiv:2312.00752v2 [cs.LG] 31 May 2024




                                                                                         agu@cs.cmu.edu, tri@tridao.me


                                                                                                        Abstract
                                                 Foundation models, now powering most of the exciting applications in deep learning, are almost universally based on the
                                                 Transformer architecture and its core attention module. Many subquadratic-time architectures such as linear attention,
                                                 gated convolution and recurrent models, and structured state space models (SSMs) have been developed to address
                                                 Transformers’ computational inefficiency on long sequences, but they have not performed as well as attention on important
                                                 modalities such as language. We identify that a key weakness of such models is their inability to perform content-based
                                                 reasoning, and make several improvements. First, simply letting the SSM parameters be functions of the input addresses
                                                 their weakness with discrete modalities, allowing the model to selectively propagate or forget information along the
                                                 sequence length dimension depending on the current token. Second, even though this change prevents the use of efficient
                                                 convolutions, we design a hardware-aware parallel algorithm in recurrent mode. We integrate these selective SSMs into a
                                                 simplified end-to-end neural network architecture without attention or even MLP blocks (Mamba). Mamba enjoys fast
                                                 inference (5× higher throughput than Transformers) and linear scaling in sequence length, and its performance improves
                                                 on real data up to million-length sequences. As a general sequence model backbone, Mamba achieves state-of-the-art
                                                 performance across several modalities such as language, audio, and genomics. On language modeling, our Mamba-3B model
                                                 outperforms Transformers of the same size and matches Transformers twice its size, both in pretraining and downstream
                                                 evaluation.


                                         1      Introduction
                                         Foundation models (FMs), or large models pretrained on massive data then adapted for downstream tasks, have emerged
                                         as an effective paradigm in modern machine learning. The backbone of these FMs are often sequence models, operating on
                                         arbitrary sequences of inputs from a wide variety of domains such as language, images, speech, audio, time series, and
                                         genomics (Brown et al. 2020; Dosovitskiy et al. 2020; Ismail Fawaz et al. 2019; Oord et al. 2016; Poli et al. 2023; Sutskever,
                                         Vinyals, and Quoc V Le 2014). While this concept is agnostic to a particular choice of model architecture, modern FMs are
                                         predominantly based on a single type of sequence model: the Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) and its core attention
                                         layer (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015) The efficacy of self-attention is attributed to its ability to route information densely
                                         within a context window, allowing it to model complex data. However, this property brings fundamental drawbacks:
                                         an inability to model anything outside of a finite window, and quadratic scaling with respect to the window length.
                                         An enormous body of research has appeared on more efficient variants of attention to overcome these drawbacks (Tay,
                                         Dehghani, Bahri, et al. 2022), but often at the expense of the very properties that makes it effective. As of yet, none of these
                                         variants have been shown to be empirically effective at scale across domains.
                                         Recently, structured state space sequence models (SSMs) (Gu, Goel, and Ré 2022; Gu, Johnson, Goel, et al. 2021) have
                                         emerged as a promising class of architectures for sequence modeling. These models can be interpreted as a combination of
                                         recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and convolutional neural networks (CNNs), with inspiration from classical state space
                                         models (Kalman 1960). This class of models can be computed very efficiently as either a recurrence or convolution, with
                                         linear or near-linear scaling in sequence length. Additionally, they have principled mechanisms for modeling long-range
                                         dependencies (Gu, Dao, et al. 2020) in certain data modalities, and have dominated benchmarks such as the Long Range
                                             ∗ Alphabetical by first name.




                                                                                                              1
Arena (Tay, Dehghani, Abnar, et al. 2021). Many flavors of SSMs (Gu, Goel, and Ré 2022; Gu, Gupta, et al. 2022; Gupta, Gu,
and Berant 2022; Y. Li et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2023; Orvieto et al. 2023; Smith, Warrington, and Linderman 2023) have been
successful in domains involving continuous signal data such as audio and vision (Goel et al. 2022; Nguyen, Goel, et al. 2022;
Saon, Gupta, and Cui 2023). However, they have been less effective at modeling discrete and information-dense data such
as text.
We propose a new class of selective state space models, that improves on prior work on several axes to achieve the
modeling power of Transformers while scaling linearly in sequence length.

Selection Mechanism. First, we identify a key limitation of prior models: the ability to efficiently select data in an
input-dependent manner (i.e. focus on or ignore particular inputs). Building on intuition based on important synthetic
tasks such as selective copy and induction heads, we design a simple selection mechanism by parameterizing the SSM
parameters based on the input. This allows the model to filter out irrelevant information and remember relevant information
indefinitely.

Hardware-aware Algorithm. This simple change poses a technical challenge for the computation of the model; in
fact, all prior SSMs models must be time- and input-invariant in order to be computationally efficient. We overcome this
with a hardware-aware algorithm that computes the model recurrently with a scan instead of convolution, but does not
materialize the expanded state in order to avoid IO access between different levels of the GPU memory hierarchy. The
resulting implementation is faster than previous methods both in theory (scaling linearly in sequence length, compared to
pseudo-linear for all convolution-based SSMs) and on modern hardware (up to 3× faster on A100 GPUs).

Architecture. We simplify prior deep sequence model architectures by combining the design of prior SSM architectures
(Dao, Fu, Saab, et al. 2023) with the MLP block of Transformers into a single block, leading to a simple and homogenous
architecture design (Mamba) incorporating selective state spaces.
Selective SSMs, and by extension the Mamba architecture, are fully recurrent models with key properties that make them
suitable as the backbone of general foundation models operating on sequences. (i) High quality: selectivity brings strong
performance on dense modalities such as language and genomics. (ii) Fast training and inference: computation and memory
scales linearly in sequence length during training, and unrolling the model autoregressively during inference requires only
constant time per step since it does not require a cache of previous elements. (iii) Long context: the quality and efficiency
together yield performance improvements on real data up to sequence length 1M.
We empirically validate Mamba’s potential as a general sequence FM backbone, in both pretraining quality and domain-
specific task performance, on several types of modalities and settings:
• Synthetics. On important synthetic tasks such as copying and induction heads that have been proposed as being key to
  large language models, Mamba not only solves them easily but can extrapolate solutions indefinitely long (>1M tokens).
• Audio and Genomics. Mamba out-performs prior state-of-the-art models such as SaShiMi, Hyena, and Transformers
  on modeling audio waveforms and DNA sequences, both in pretraining quality and downstream metrics (e.g. reducing
  FID on a challenging speech generation dataset by more than half). In both settings, its performance improves with longer
  context up to million-length sequences.
• Language Modeling. Mamba is the first linear-time sequence model that truly achieves Transformer-quality performance,
  both in pretraining perplexity and downstream evaluations. With scaling laws up to 1B parameters, we show that Mamba
  exceeds the performance of a large range of baselines, including very strong modern Transformer training recipes based
  on LLaMa (Touvron et al. 2023). Our Mamba language model has 5× generation throughput compared to Transformers
  of similar size, and Mamba-3B’s quality matches that of Transformers twice its size (e.g. 4 points higher avg. on common
  sense reasoning compared to Pythia-3B and even exceeding Pythia-7B).
Model code and pre-trained checkpoints are open-sourced at https://github.com/state-spaces/mamba.


2    State Space Models
Structured state space sequence models (S4) are a recent class of sequence models for deep learning that are broadly related
to RNNs, and CNNs, and classical state space models. They are inspired by a particular continuous system (1) that maps a


                                                             2
                                                 Selective State Space Model
                                                   with Hardware-aware State Expansion

                                                                                 𝐴




    ℎ!"#                                                                                                                               ℎ!
                  𝑥!                                                                                                   𝑦!
                                              𝐵!                                                 𝐶!
                                                                    Discretize
                                                                                     ∆!                                                 GPU
                                                                                                                                       SRAM
                                  Project
                                                                                                                                   GPU HBM
                                              Selection Mechanism

Figure 1: (Overview.) Structured SSMs independently map each channel (e.g. 𝐷 = 5) of an input 𝑥 to output 𝑦 through a higher
dimensional latent state ℎ (e.g. 𝑁 = 4). Prior SSMs avoid materializing this large effective state (𝐷𝑁 , times batch size 𝐵 and sequence
length 𝐿) through clever alternate computation paths requiring time-invariance: the (Δ, 𝑨, 𝑩, 𝑪) parameters are constant across time. Our
selection mechanism adds back input-dependent dynamics, which also requires a careful hardware-aware algorithm to only materialize
the expanded states in more efficient levels of the GPU memory hierarchy.


1-dimensional function or sequence 𝑥 (𝑡) ∈ R ↦→ 𝑦 (𝑡) ∈ R through an implicit latent state ℎ(𝑡) ∈ R𝑁 .
Concretely, S4 models are defined with four parameters (Δ, 𝑨, 𝑩, 𝑪), which define a sequence-to-sequence transformation
in two stages.


                                                                                                                            𝑘
       ℎ ′ (𝑡) = 𝑨ℎ(𝑡) + 𝑩𝑥 (𝑡)       (1a)              ℎ𝑡 = 𝑨ℎ𝑡 −1 + 𝑩𝑥𝑡                 (2a)   𝑲 = (𝑪𝑩, 𝑪𝑨𝑩, . . . , 𝑪𝑨 𝑩, . . . )          (3a)
        𝑦 (𝑡) = 𝑪ℎ(𝑡)                 (1b)              𝑦𝑡 = 𝑪ℎ𝑡                          (2b)   𝑦 =𝑥∗𝑲                                       (3b)

Discretization. The first stage transforms the “continuous parameters” (Δ, 𝑨, 𝑩) to “discrete parameters” (𝑨, 𝑩) through
fixed formulas 𝑨 = 𝑓𝐴 (Δ, 𝑨) and 𝑩 = 𝑓𝐵 (Δ, 𝑨, 𝑩), where the pair (𝑓𝐴 , 𝑓𝐵 ) is called a discretization rule. Various rules can
be used such as the zero-order hold (ZOH) defined in equation (4).

                                            𝑨 = exp(Δ𝑨)             𝑩 = (Δ𝑨) −1 (exp(Δ𝑨) − 𝑰 ) · Δ𝑩                                             (4)

Discretization has deep connections to continuous-time systems which can endow them with additional properties such
as resolution invariance (Nguyen, Goel, et al. 2022) and automatically ensuring that the model is properly normalized
(Gu, Johnson, Timalsina, et al. 2023; Orvieto et al. 2023). It also has connections to gating mechanisms of RNNs (Gu,
Gulcehre, et al. 2020; Tallec and Ollivier 2018) which we will revisit in Section 3.5. However, from a mechanical point
of view discretization can simply be viewed as the first step of the computation graph in the forward pass of an SSM.
Alternate flavors of SSMs can bypass the discretization step and parameterize (𝑨, 𝑩) directly instead (Zhang et al. 2023),
which may be easier to reason about.

Computation. After the parameters have been transformed from (Δ, 𝑨, 𝑩, 𝑪) ↦→ (𝑨, 𝑩, 𝑪), the model can be computed
in two ways, either as a linear recurrence (2) or a global convolution (3).
Commonly, the model uses the convolutional mode (3) for efficient parallelizable training (where the whole input sequence
is seen ahead of time), and switched into recurrent mode (2) for efficient autoregressive inference (where the inputs are
seen one timestep at a time).

Linear Time Invariance (LTI). An important property of equations (1) to (3) is that the model’s dynamics are constant
through time. In other words (Δ, 𝑨, 𝑩, 𝑪), and consequently (𝑨, 𝑩) as well, are fixed for all time-steps. This property is


                                                                                 3
called linear time invariance (LTI), which is deeply connected to recurrence and convolutions. Informally, we think of
LTI SSMs as being equivalent to any linear recurrence (2a) or convolution (3b), and use LTI as an umbrella term for these
classes of models.
Thus far, all structured SSMs have been LTI (e.g. computed as convolutions) because of fundamental efficiency constraints,
discussed in Section 3.3. However, a core insight of this work is that LTI models have fundamental limitations in modeling
certain types of data, and our technical contributions involve removing the LTI constraint while overcoming the efficiency
bottlenecks.

Structure and Dimensions. Finally, we note that structured SSMs are so named because computing them efficiently
also requires imposing structure on the 𝑨 matrix. The most popular form of structure is diagonal (Gu, Gupta, et al. 2022;
Gupta, Gu, and Berant 2022; Smith, Warrington, and Linderman 2023), which we also use.
In this case, the 𝑨 ∈ R𝑁 ×𝑁 , 𝑩 ∈ R𝑁 ×1, 𝑪 ∈ R1×𝑁 matrices can all be represented by 𝑁 numbers. To operate over an input
sequence 𝑥 of batch size 𝐵 and length 𝐿 with 𝐷 channels, the SSM is applied independently to each channel. Note that in
this case, the total hidden state has dimension 𝐷𝑁 per input, and computing it over the sequence length requires 𝑂 (𝐵𝐿𝐷𝑁 )
time and memory; this is the root of the fundamental efficiency bottleneck addressed in Section 3.3.

General State Space Models. We note that the term state space model has a very broad meaning which simply represents
the notion of any recurrent process with a latent state. It has been used to refer to many disparate concepts in different
disciplines, including Markov decision processes (MDP) (reinforcement learning (Hafner et al. 2020)), dynamic causal
modeling (DCM) (computational neuroscience (Friston, Harrison, and Penny 2003)), Kalman filters (controls (Kalman 1960)),
hidden Markov models (HMM) and linear dynamical systems (LDS) (machine learning), and recurrent (and sometimes
convolutional) models at large (deep learning).
Throughout this entire paper we use the term “SSM” to refer exclusively to the class of structured SSMs or S4 models (Gu,
Goel, and Ré 2022; Gu, Gupta, et al. 2022; Gupta, Gu, and Berant 2022; Hasani et al. 2023; Ma et al. 2023; Smith, Warrington,
and Linderman 2023) and use these terms interchangeably. For convenience we may also include derivatives of such
models, such as those focusing on either the linear-recurrence or global-convolution viewpoints (Y. Li et al. 2023; Orvieto
et al. 2023; Poli et al. 2023), and clarify nuances when necessary.

SSM Architectures. SSMs are standalone sequence transformations that can be incorporated into end-to-end neural
network architectures. (We also sometimes call SSM architectures SSNNs, which are to SSM layers as CNNs are to linear
convolution layers.) We discuss some of the most well-known SSM architectures, many of which will also serve as our
primary baselines.
• Linear attention (Katharopoulos et al. 2020) is an approximation of self-attention involving a recurrence which can be
  viewed as a degenerate linear SSM.
• H3 (Dao, Fu, Saab, et al. 2023) generalized this recurrence to use S4; it can be viewed as an architecture with an SSM
  sandwiched by two gated connections (Figure 3). H3 also inserts a standard local convolution, which they frame as a
  shift-SSM, before the main SSM layer.
• Hyena (Poli et al. 2023) uses the same architecture as H3 but replaces the S4 layer with an MLP-parameterized global
  convolution (Romero et al. 2021).
• RetNet (Y. Sun et al. 2023) adds an additional gate to the architecture and uses a simpler SSM, allowing an alternative
  parallelizable computation path, using a variant of multi-head attention (MHA) instead of convolutions.
• RWKV (B. Peng et al. 2023) is a recent RNN designed for language modeling based on another linear attention approxi-
  mation, the attention-free Transformer (S. Zhai et al. 2021). Its main “WKV” mechanism involves LTI recurrences and
  can be viewed as the ratio of two SSMs.
Other closely related SSMs and architectures are discussed further in an extended related work (Appendix B). We highlight
in particular S5 (Smith, Warrington, and Linderman 2023), QRNN (Bradbury et al. 2016), and SRU (Lei et al. 2017), which
we view as the most closely related methods to our core selective SSM.




                                                             4
3     Selective State Space Models
We motivate our selection mechanism using intuition from synthetic tasks (Section 3.1), then explain how to incorporate
this mechanism into state space models (Section 3.2). The resulting time-varying SSMs cannot use convolutions, presenting
a technical challenge of how to compute them efficiently. We overcome this with a hardware-aware algorithm that exploits
the memory hierarchy on modern hardware (Section 3.3). We then describe a simple SSM architecture without attention or
even MLP blocks (Section 3.4). Finally, we discuss some additional properties of selection mechanisms (Section 3.5).

3.1    Motivation: Selection as a Means of Compression
We argue that a fundamental problem of sequence modeling is compressing context into a smaller state. In fact, we can
view the tradeoffs of popular sequence models from this point of view. For example, attention is both effective and
inefficient because it explicitly does not compress context at all. This can be seen from the fact that autoregressive inference
requires explicitly storing the entire context (i.e. the KV cache), which directly causes the slow linear-time inference and
quadratic-time training of Transformers. On the other hand, recurrent models are efficient because they have a finite state,
implying constant-time inference and linear-time training. However, their effectiveness is limited by how well this state
has compressed the context.
To understand this principle, we focus on two running examples of synthetic tasks (Figure 2).
• The Selective Copying task modifies the popular Copying task (Arjovsky, Shah, and Bengio 2016) by varying the
  position of the tokens to memorize. It requires content-aware reasoning to be able to memorize the relevant tokens
  (colored) and filter out the irrelevant ones (white).
• The Induction Heads task is a well-known mechanism hypothesized to explain the majority of in-context learning
  abilities of LLMs (Olsson et al. 2022). It requires context-aware reasoning to know when to produce the correct output in
  the appropriate context (black).
These tasks reveal the failure mode of LTI models. From the recurrent view, their constant dynamics (e.g. the (𝑨, 𝑩)
transitions in (2)) cannot let them select the correct information from their context, or affect the hidden state passed
along the sequence in an input-dependent way. From the convolutional view, it is known that global convolutions can
solve the vanilla Copying task (Romero et al. 2021) because it only requires time-awareness, but that they have difficulty
with the Selective Copying task because of lack of content-awareness (Figure 2). More concretely, the spacing between
inputs-to-outputs is varying and cannot be modeled by static convolution kernels.
In summary, the efficiency vs. effectiveness tradeoff of sequence models is characterized by how well they compress
their state: efficient models must have a small state, while effective models must have a state that contains all necessary
information from the context. In turn, we propose that a fundamental principle for building sequence models is selectivity:
or the context-aware ability to focus on or filter out inputs into a sequential state. In particular, a selection mechanism
controls how information propagates or interacts along the sequence dimension (see Section 3.5 for more discussion).

3.2    Improving SSMs with Selection
One method of incorporating a selection mechanism into models is by letting their parameters that affect interactions along
the sequence (e.g. the recurrent dynamics of an RNN or the convolution kernel of a CNN) be input-dependent.
Algorithms 1 and 2 illustrates the main selection mechanism that we use. The main difference is simply making several
parameters Δ, 𝑩, 𝑪 functions of the input, along with the associated changes to tensor shapes throughout. In particular, we
highlight that these parameters now have a length dimension 𝐿, meaning that the model has changed from time-invariant
to time-varying. (Note that shape annotations were described in Section 2.) This loses the equivalence to convolutions (3)
with implications for its efficiency, discussed next.
We specifically choose 𝑠𝐵 (𝑥) = Linear𝑁 (𝑥), 𝑠𝐶 (𝑥) = Linear𝑁 (𝑥), 𝑠 Δ (𝑥) = Broadcast𝐷 (Linear1 (𝑥)), and 𝜏Δ = softplus,
where Linear𝑑 is a parameterized projection to dimension 𝑑. The choice of 𝑠 Δ and 𝜏Δ is due to a connection to RNN gating
mechanisms explained in Section 3.5.




                                                               5
                                              Copying                                                                                         Selective Copying

Output                                                                                                              Output


Input                                                                                                               Input



Solution                                                                                                                                      Induction Heads
           Perfectly solved by LTI (e.g. convolutional) models that do not need to look at the actual inputs
                                                                                                                                                                           ?



Figure 2: (Left) The standard version of the Copying task involves constant spacing between input and output elements and is easily
solved by time-invariant models such as linear recurrences and global convolutions. (Right Top) The Selective Copying task has random
spacing in between inputs and requires time-varying models that can selectively remember or ignore inputs depending on their content.
(Right Bottom) The Induction Heads task is an example of associative recall that requires retrieving an answer based on context, a key
ability for LLMs.



Algorithm 1 SSM (S4)                                                                                           Algorithm 2 SSM + Selection (S6)
Input: 𝑥 : (B, L, D)                                                                                           Input: 𝑥 : (B, L, D)
Output: 𝑦 : (B, L, D)                                                                                          Output: 𝑦 : (B, L, D)
 1: 𝑨 : (D, N) ← Parameter                                                                                      1: 𝑨 : (D, N) ← Parameter
                                           ⊲ Represents structured 𝑁 × 𝑁 matrix                                                                ⊲ Represents structured 𝑁 × 𝑁 matrix
 2: 𝑩 : (D, N) ← Parameter                                                                                         2: 𝑩 : (B, L, N) ← 𝑠 𝐵 (𝑥)
 3: 𝑪 : (D, N) ← Parameter                                                                                         3: 𝑪 : (B, L, N) ← 𝑠𝐶 (𝑥)
 4: Δ : (D) ← 𝜏 Δ (Parameter)                                                                                      4: Δ : (B, L, D) ← 𝜏 Δ (Parameter+𝑠 Δ (𝑥))
 5: 𝑨, 𝑩 : (D, N) ← discretize(Δ, 𝑨, 𝑩)                                                                            5: 𝑨, 𝑩 : (B, L, D, N) ← discretize(Δ, 𝑨, 𝑩)
 6: 𝑦 ← SSM(𝑨, 𝑩, 𝑪)(𝑥)                                                                                            6: 𝑦 ← SSM(𝑨, 𝑩, 𝑪)(𝑥)
                                ⊲ Time-invariant: recurrence or convolution                                                                   ⊲ Time-varying: recurrence (scan) only
 7: return 𝑦                                                                                                       7: return 𝑦



3.3      Efficient Implementation of Selective SSMs
Hardware-friendly primitives such as convolutions (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) and attention (Bahdanau,
Cho, and Bengio 2015; Vaswani et al. 2017) enjoy widespread application. Here we aim to make selective SSMs efficient on
modern hardware (GPUs) as well. The selection mechanism is quite natural, and earlier works attempted to incorporate
special cases of selection, such as letting Δ vary over time in recurrent SSMs (Gu, Dao, et al. 2020). However, as previously
mentioned a core limitation in the usage of SSMs is their computational efficiency, which was why S4 and all derivatives
used LTI (non-selective) models, most commonly in the form of global convolutions.

3.3.1      Motivation of Prior Models
We first revisit this motivation and overview our approach to overcome limitations of prior methods.
• At a high level, recurrent models such as SSMs always balance a tradeoff between expressivity and speed: as discussed in
  Section 3.1, models with larger hidden state dimension should be more effective but slower. Thus we want to maximize
  hidden state dimension without paying speed and memory costs.
• Note that the recurrent mode is more flexible than the convolution mode, since the latter (3) is derived from expanding
  the former (2) (Gu, Goel, and Ré 2022; Gu, Johnson, Goel, et al. 2021). However, this would require computing and
  materializing the latent state ℎ with shape (B, L, D, N), which is much larger (by a factor of 𝑁 , the SSM state dimension)
  than the input 𝑥 and output 𝑦 of shape (B, L, D). Thus the more efficient convolution mode was introduced which could
  bypass the state computation and materializes a convolution kernel (3a) of size only (B, L, D).
• Prior LTI state space models leverage the dual recurrent-convolutional forms to increase the effective state dimension by
  a factor of 𝑁 (≈ 10 − 100), much larger than traditional RNNs, without efficiency penalties.



                                                                                                               6
